controlling influence upon events of naval power even when
transferred to an inland body of fresh water The lesson there
however was the same as in the larger fields of war heretofore
treated Not by rambling operations or naval duels are wars decided
but by force massed and handled in skilful combination It matters
not that the particular force be small The art of war is the same
throughout and may be illustrated as really though less
conspicuously by a flotilla as by an armada by a corporals guard
or the three units of the Horatii as by a host of a hundred
thousand
The interest of the War of 1812 to Americans has commonly been felt
to lie in the brilliant evidence of high professional tone and
efficiency reached by their navy as shown by the singleship actions
and by the two decisive victories achieved by little squadrons upon
the lakes Without in the least overlooking the permanent value of
such examples and such traditions to the nation and to the military
service which they illustrate it nevertheless appears to the writer
that the effect may be even harmful to the people at large if it be
permitted to conceal the deeply mortifying condition to which the
country was reduced by parsimony in preparation or to obscure the
lessons thence to be drawn for practical application now It is
perhaps useless to quarrel with the tendency of mankind to turn its
eyes from disagreeable subjects and to dwell complacently upon those
which minister to selfcontent We mostly read the newspapers in which
we find our views reflected and dispense ourselves easily with the
less pleasing occupation of seeing them roughly disputed but a writer
on a subject of national importance may not thus exempt himself from
the unpleasant features of his task
The author has thought it also essential to precede his work by a
somewhat full exposition of the train of causes which through a long
series of years led to the war It may seem at first farfetched to go
back to 1651 for the origins of the War of 1812 but without such
preliminary consideration it is impossible to understand or to make
due allowance for the course of Great Britain It will be found
however that the treatment of the earlier period is brief and only
sufficient for a clear comprehension of the five years of intense
international strain preceding the final rupture years the full
narrative of which is indispensable to appreciating the grounds and
development of the quarrelto realize what they fought each other
for
That much of Great Britains action was unjustifiable and at times
even monstrous regarded in itself alone must be admitted but we
shall ill comprehend the necessity of preparation for war if we
neglect to note the pressure of emergency of deadly peril upon a
state or if we fail to recognize that traditional habits of thought
constitute with nations as with individuals a compulsive moral force
which an opponent can control only by the display of adequate physical
power Such to the British people was the conviction of their right
and need to compel the service of their native seamen wherever found
on the high seas The conclusion of the writer is that at a very
